docs/extending/code-overview/evaluation.rst, before:

.. index:: evaluation
.. _evaluation:

.. contents::

===========================
Evaluation of an Expression
===========================

Evaluation Overview
===================

In contrast to the simplicity and regularity for representing the data
in an ``Expression``, *evaluation* of this data or expression is more
involved than conventional programming languages. I suppose this is to
be expected.

Part of the complexity in evaluating an expression involves:

* how Python methods and values are bound to symbol literals
* how the expression is pattern matched and rewritten based on symbol
  values and rules that can be dynamically changing; term rewriting
  can take into account the current types of variables or bound
  symbols
* how to select the method to dispatch for a Mathics function call and how
  parameter values are assigned after term rewriting and symbol binding is done
* how we determine when the evaluation of an expression is complete

If you have programmed in WL and have an understanding of the
complexities involved in WL evaluation, aside from the Python-syntax
and conventions used here, the evaluation process of this may seem
familiar. The conventions that this program uses will be new.
This part is custom to this program.

If however you are instead not familiar with WL, but very familiar
with Python or similar languages, a lot of this may seem
mysterious. Functions don't get called using a traditional way where
you create an object like ``Number()`` and then instantiate a method
on that, like ``+``, ``__plus__()``, or even ``Times()``.

Instead all Function calls are triggered through an evaluation method
which involves the concept of `rewriting
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rewriting>`_. This alone can obscure
what gets called. There Mathics function ``TraceEvaluation[]`` can
help in understanding the subexpressions that are computed in evaluation.

And as mentioned above, aside from this, the behavior is encoded in
Mathics' Python code using conventions uniquely defined in this
system. Built-in Functions are special methods in classes derived from
a Bulltin class.  Furthermore they must have names that start out
``apply`` and must have docstrings that contain WL patterns that
indicate when the method matches. More on this is described later.


Evaluation can leave an Expression Seemingly Unchanged
======================================================

If you've used Mathics and misspelled a builtin function name or
called a function with the wrong number of parameters, you might find
it odd that sometimes you won't get an error message but just the same
thing back. Or what you might type might be coorect and and complete
expression ``myvariable`` or ``Pi`` can get what looks like the same
thing back.

This isn't a bug, but a feature of the design of the language.

In the case of ``myvariable`` the language detects this as a symbol
and symbols do not need to be declared in advance of their use.
Little noticed though is that the name of the symbol ``myvariable``
has been noted in case it comes up again.

When you type ``Pi`` all by itself, unless a numeric approximation of
that was requested, ``Pi`` refers to its symbol value. The expression
return is again the same, with the exception of properties of the
expression that may not be visible. A later step may decide to
materialize a value or convert the representation of ``Pi`` into a
unicode string.

And when an :term:`M-expression` or an Expression doesn't match a particlar
form for a function call, it *needs* to be left unchanged: the act of
not matching a particular function in of itself isn't an error because
there may be some other rule around, maybe even at a different level
of the Expression Tree which will match.



Broad Description of the Rewrite/Apply/Eval Process
===================================================

The top-level evaluation performs time and evaluation process
management for the overall evaluation process.

After setting up the bookkeeping for this, there is a loop performing
a possibly recursive Rewrite/Apply/Eval step described next.  This is
done until that step reports that no further evaluation is needed or
possible.

The Rewrite/Apply/Eval step has an term-rewriting phase followed by a
function application phase; "term" here refers to a elements of
the expression. [1]_

The word "apply" in the title really refers to two separate kinds of
applications: rule application and function application.

The first part of the he Rewrite/Apply/Eval step, is to reorder and/or
rewrite the expression. This transformation is directed by looking at
properties of the Head symbols, its associated Attributes and
rules. An attribute like ``Orderless`` can cause elements in the
rest of the tree to be reordered.

Also, when a rewrite rule of a Head's Symbol is found to match, then
the replacement substitution is preformed and this can change overall
expression.

Depending on a Symbol's attributes like ``Hold``, an expression's
elements may be traversed.

After the expression rewriting phase is complete, function application
is performed. Function application here finds the Python method of a
class to call and performs the binding elements to parameters of the
Python method, along with an additional evaluation object bound as
the ``evaluation`` parameter.


Detailed Rewrite/Apply/Eval Process
===================================

As described above, Expression evaluation is an iterative and recursive
transformation process.

Here we give in a little more detail about a single rewrite/apply/eval
step of this process. See also `The Standard Evaluation Sequence
<https://reference.wolfram.com/language/tutorial/Evaluation.html>`_.


Gather information from ``Head`` and gather its elements
--------------------------------------------------------

What appears in this section follows largely what was in the section
A.4.1 "The Standard Evaluation Sequence" of the Mathematica Book for
version 5.

If the expression is a literal value, e.g. ``Number``, ``String``, ``Image``, etc.) then leave it unchanged and return.

Evalute ``Head`` and get its attributes.

Depending the following attributes

* ``HoldFirst``,
* ``HoldAll``,
* ``HoldRest``
* ``HoldAllComplete``

various elements are evaluated. However elements of that have the form:

* ``Evaluate[]``
* ``Unevaluated[]``

also specify which elements wich are evaluated or not before rewriting and function application.

At the end of this, variables ``head``, ``attributes`` (of head), and ``elements`` (of the expression) are set.

Build a new Expression
-----------------------

Build a new expression with using information from ``head`` and the ``elements`` gathered in the previous step.

This substeps here are:

* Try to flatten sequences in the expression unless the ``SequenceHold`` or ``HoldAllComplete`` attributes are set in ``Head``
* Change ``Unevaluated[expr]`` to ``expr`` but mark the expression as being unevaluated
* Flatten expressions involving nested functions if the ``Flat`` attribute was found in ``Head``
* Sort elements if the ``Orderless`` attribute was found in ``Head``

Compute evaluation timestamp
----------------------------

Compute timestamp in a expression cache. This may lead to invalidation and rebuild the expression cache elsewhere.

Setup Thread rewrite Listable Functions
---------------------------------------

Threading is needed when head has the ``Listable`` Attribute.
``Expression.thread`` rewrites the expression: # ``F[{a,b,c,...}]``
as: ``{F[a], F[b], F[c], ...}``.

Note that treading here is different from Python or OS threads, even
though the intent of this attribute was to allow for hardware
threading to make use of more cores.

Right now, we do not make use of Python thread or hardware threading.
Still, we need to perform this rewrite to maintain correct semantic
behavior.  Would the operation benefit running in separate threads?

Search for a Rule in ``Head`` to apply
--------------------------------------

Search for a rule in ``Head`` that matches the expression

Apply Rule or restore Expression
--------------------------------

If a rule was found, apply it getting back an evaluated expression.
If the expression is unchanged, restore it to its state before building a new expression,
and reset the evaluation cache to its value before updating.


Mathics Function Application
============================

.. index:: Symbol, Predefined, Builtin, Expression

The first element, called the "head" (or ``Head[]``) of an
``Expression`` is a ``Symbol``.

When there are other elements, the head is assumed to be a Mathics
function call, where  the function name comes from the head. If this is a
built-in function, like ``Plus``, the Mathics function name is the name
of a Python class derived ultimately from ``Builtin``. These
Mathics function-like classes are described in later sections.

As described in the previous section, before invoking that Mathics
function, we need to check for a rewrite rule that applies to the
Mathics function call. If a rule is found, it will have attached to a
bound method name starts with ``apply``. [2]_

These rules get created on loading the module containing a subclass of
``Builtin`` implementing some Mathcs Primative Funtion.  The rules
come from the docstrings of a methods that start with ``apply``.

The docsting includes not only a pattern to match on but how the
parameters should get bound when applying the function.
instance of an ``Evaluation`` is also supplied as a parameter in the call.

There is a degenerate situation though where there is no rule
rewriting, or apply methods involved. Here the instance method's
*evaluate()* method is called. This is used when a function has no
parameters or arguments. This kind of thing happens when a constant or
variable name is used; here the variable name is prefaced with a
``$``. Examples are ``$VersionNumber`` or ``$MachineName``.

As we go along, we'll describe other conventions that are used that
are crucial in getting the interpreter work properly. But for now,
when writing a new Builtin Function, just remember that unless there
is an ``evaluate()`` method, there is a method name in a Mathics
function class that begins with ``apply``, and its docstring is used
to figure out whether the elements of the list are applicable to that
function.

Here is an example for the `Environment
<https://reference.wolfram.com/language/ref/Environment.html>`_
primitive taken from the code

.. code-block:: python

   class Environment(Builtin):

   def apply(self, var, evaluation):
       """Environment[var_?StringQ]"""
   ...

The ``apply()`` function above will get called when finding a
``Expression`` whose ``Head`` value is ``Environment`` and it has one
element or parameter which which we will call ``var``.  That element or
parameter should also much be a ``Symbol`` object.

For more information describing Mathics function signatures that are
used in the ``apply`` method's docstring , see `Functions and Programs
<https://reference.wolfram.com/language/tutorial/FunctionsAndPrograms.html>`_
and `Patterns
<https://reference.wolfram.com/language/tutorial/Patterns.html>`_.

One useful Mathics function that is useful in debugging pattern matching is  `Cases <https://reference.wolfram.com/language/ref/Cases.html>`_.

Built-in Function Name Descriptions
===================================

Online and printed documentation for builtin ``Environment`` comes from the docstring for ``class Environment`` if that exists.
In the example above, it was omitted. Here is what it looks like in the actual code.

.. code-block:: python

    class Environment(Builtin):
        """
        <dl>
          <dt>'Environment[$var$]'
          <dd>gives the value of an operating system environment variable.
        </dl>
        X> Environment["HOME"]
         = ...
        """

        def apply(self, var, evaluation):
        <dl>
          <dt>'Environment[$var$]'
          <dd>gives the value of an operating system environment variable.
        </dl>
        X> Environment["HOME"]
         = ...
	""""

The XML/HTML markup is used to format help nicely. "Documentation markup" elsewhere describes this markup.


Python Code for Evaluating an Expression
========================================

Building on the code shown above for parsing an expression,
here is code to evaluate an expression from a string:

.. code-block:: python

   # The below is a repeat of the parsing code...

   from mathics.core.parser import parse, SingleLineFeeder
   from mathics.core.definitions import Definitions

   definitions = Definitions(add_builtin=True)
   str_expression = "1 + 2 / 3"
   expr = parse(definitions, SingleLineFeeder(str_expression))

   # This code is new...

   from mathics.core.evaluation import Evaluation
   evaluation = Evaluation(definitions=definitions, catch_interrupt=False)
   last_result = expr.evaluate(evaluation)

   print("type", type(last_result))
   print("expr: ", last_result)

Running the above produces:

::

   type <class 'mathics.core.expression.Rational'>
   expr:  5/3

All of the above is wrapped nicely in the module ``mathics.session`` which
performs the above. So here is an equivalent program:

.. code-block:: python

    from mathics.session import session
    str_expression = "1 + 2 / 3"
    result = session.evaluate(str_expression)

    .. rubric: Footnotes

.. [1] Other names for "element": "subexpression" or in in Mathics/WL the ``Rest[]`` function.
.. [2] The use of the word ``apply`` is unfortunate. These methods are typically called evaluation or "eval" methods. Possibly sometime in the future, we will correct this mistake.

Commit message:

More modernizations
* Make more clear deprecated doc markup
* Add url with link text form
* Describe return values of an evaluation method

docs/extending/code-overview/evaluation.rst, after:

.. index:: evaluation
.. _evaluation:

.. contents::

===========================
Evaluation of an Expression
===========================

Evaluation Overview
===================

In contrast to the simplicity and regularity for representing the data
in an ``Expression``, *evaluation* of this data or expression is more
involved than conventional programming languages. I suppose this is to
be expected.

Part of the complexity in evaluating an expression involves:

* how Python methods and values are bound to symbol literals
* how the expression is pattern matched and rewritten based on symbol
  values and rules that can be dynamically changing; term rewriting
  can take into account the current types of variables or bound
  symbols
* how to select the method to dispatch for a Mathics function call and how
  parameter values are assigned after term rewriting and symbol binding is done
* how we determine when the evaluation of an expression is complete

If you have programmed in WL and have an understanding of the
complexities involved in WL evaluation, aside from the Python-syntax
and conventions used here, the evaluation process of this may seem
familiar. The conventions that this program uses will be new.
This part is custom to this program.

If however you are instead not familiar with WL, but very familiar
with Python or similar languages, a lot of this may seem
mysterious. Functions don't get called using a traditional way where
you create an object like ``Number()`` and then instantiate a method
on that, like ``+``, ``__plus__()``, or even ``Times()``.

Instead all Function calls are triggered through an evaluation method
which involves the concept of `rewriting
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rewriting>`_. This alone can obscure
what gets called. There Mathics function ``TraceEvaluation[]`` can
help in understanding the subexpressions that are computed in evaluation.

And as mentioned above, aside from this, the behavior is encoded in
Mathics' Python code using conventions uniquely defined in this
system. Built-in Functions are special methods in classes derived from
a Bulltin class.  Furthermore they must have names that start out
``apply`` and must have docstrings that contain WL patterns that
indicate when the method matches. More on this is described later.


Evaluation can leave an Expression Seemingly Unchanged
======================================================

If you've used Mathics and misspelled a builtin function name or
called a function with the wrong number of parameters, you might find
it odd that sometimes you won't get an error message but just the same
thing back. Or what you might type might be coorect and and complete
expression ``myvariable`` or ``Pi`` can get what looks like the same
thing back.

This isn't a bug, but a feature of the design of the language.

In the case of ``myvariable`` the language detects this as a symbol
and symbols do not need to be declared in advance of their use.
Little noticed though is that the name of the symbol ``myvariable``
has been noted in case it comes up again.

When you type ``Pi`` all by itself, unless a numeric approximation of
that was requested, ``Pi`` refers to its symbol value. The expression
return is again the same, with the exception of properties of the
expression that may not be visible. A later step may decide to
materialize a value or convert the representation of ``Pi`` into a
unicode string.

And when an :term:`M-expression` or an Expression doesn't match a particlar
form for a function call, it *needs* to be left unchanged: the act of
not matching a particular function in of itself isn't an error because
there may be some other rule around, maybe even at a different level
of the Expression Tree which will match.



Broad Description of the Rewrite/Apply/Eval Process
===================================================

The top-level evaluation performs time and evaluation process
management for the overall evaluation process.

After setting up the bookkeeping for this, there is a loop performing
a possibly recursive Rewrite/Apply/Eval step described next.  This is
done until that step reports that no further evaluation is needed or
possible.

The Rewrite/Apply/Eval step has an term-rewriting phase followed by a
function application phase; "term" here refers to a elements of
the expression. [1]_

The word "apply" in the title really refers to two separate kinds of
applications: rule application and function application.

The first part of the he Rewrite/Apply/Eval step, is to reorder and/or
rewrite the expression. This transformation is directed by looking at
properties of the Head symbols, its associated Attributes and
rules. An attribute like ``Orderless`` can cause elements in the
rest of the tree to be reordered.

Also, when a rewrite rule of a Head's Symbol is found to match, then
the replacement substitution is preformed and this can change overall
expression.

Depending on a Symbol's attributes like ``Hold``, an expression's
elements may be traversed.

After the expression rewriting phase is complete, function application
is performed. Function application here finds the Python method of a
class to call and performs the binding elements to parameters of the
Python method, along with an additional evaluation object bound as
the ``evaluation`` parameter.


Detailed Rewrite/Apply/Eval Process
===================================

As described above, Expression evaluation is an iterative and recursive
transformation process.

Here we give in a little more detail about a single rewrite/apply/eval
step of this process. See also `The Standard Evaluation Sequence
<https://reference.wolfram.com/language/tutorial/Evaluation.html>`_.


Gather information from ``Head`` and gather its elements
--------------------------------------------------------

What appears in this section follows largely what was in the section
A.4.1 "The Standard Evaluation Sequence" of the Mathematica Book for
version 5.

If the expression is a literal value, e.g. ``Number``, ``String``, ``Image``, etc.) then leave it unchanged and return.

Evalute ``Head`` and get its attributes.

Depending the following attributes

* ``HoldFirst``,
* ``HoldAll``,
* ``HoldRest``
* ``HoldAllComplete``

various elements are evaluated. However elements of that have the form:

* ``Evaluate[]``
* ``Unevaluated[]``

also specify which elements wich are evaluated or not before rewriting and function application.

At the end of this, variables ``head``, ``attributes`` (of head), and ``elements`` (of the expression) are set.

Build a new Expression
-----------------------

Build a new expression with using information from ``head`` and the ``elements`` gathered in the previous step.

This substeps here are:

* Try to flatten sequences in the expression unless the ``SequenceHold`` or ``HoldAllComplete`` attributes are set in ``Head``
* Change ``Unevaluated[expr]`` to ``expr`` but mark the expression as being unevaluated
* Flatten expressions involving nested functions if the ``Flat`` attribute was found in ``Head``
* Sort elements if the ``Orderless`` attribute was found in ``Head``

Compute evaluation timestamp
----------------------------

Compute timestamp in a expression cache. This may lead to invalidation and rebuild the expression cache elsewhere.

Setup Thread rewrite Listable Functions
---------------------------------------

Threading is needed when head has the ``Listable`` Attribute.
``Expression.thread`` rewrites the expression: # ``F[{a,b,c,...}]``
as: ``{F[a], F[b], F[c], ...}``.

Note that treading here is different from Python or OS threads, even
though the intent of this attribute was to allow for hardware
threading to make use of more cores.

Right now, we do not make use of Python thread or hardware threading.
Still, we need to perform this rewrite to maintain correct semantic
behavior.  Would the operation benefit running in separate threads?

Search for a Rule in ``Head`` to apply
--------------------------------------

Search for a rule in ``Head`` that matches the expression

Apply Rule or restore Expression
--------------------------------

If a rule was found, apply it getting back an evaluated expression.
If the expression is unchanged, restore it to its state before building a new expression,
and reset the evaluation cache to its value before updating.


Mathics Function Application
============================

.. index:: Symbol, Predefined, Builtin, Expression

The first element, called the "head" (or ``Head[]``) of an
``Expression`` is a ``Symbol``.

When there are other elements, the head is assumed to be a Mathics
function call, where  the function name comes from the head. If this is a
built-in function, like ``Plus``, the Mathics function name is the name
of a Python class derived ultimately from ``Builtin``. These
Mathics function-like classes are described in later sections.

As described in the previous section, before invoking that Mathics
function, we need to check for a rewrite rule that applies to the
Mathics function call. If a rule is found, it will have attached to a
bound method name starts with ``apply``. [2]_

These rules get created on loading the module containing a subclass of
``Builtin`` implementing some Mathcs Primative Funtion.  The rules
come from the docstrings of a methods that start with ``apply``.

The docsting includes not only a pattern to match on but how the
parameters should get bound when applying the function.
instance of an ``Evaluation`` is also supplied as a parameter in the call.

There is a degenerate situation though where there is no rule
rewriting, or evaluation methods involved. Here the instance method's
*evaluate()* method is called. This is used when a function has no
parameters or arguments. This kind of thing happens when a constant or
variable name is used; here the variable name is prefaced with a
``$``. Examples are ``$VersionNumber`` or ``$MachineName``.

As we go along, we'll describe other conventions that are used that
are crucial in getting the interpreter work properly. But for now,
when writing a new Builtin Function, just remember that unless there
is an ``evaluate()`` method, there is a method name in a Mathics
function class that begins with ``apply``, and its docstring is used
to figure out whether the elements of the list are applicable to that
function.

Here is an example for the `Environment
<https://reference.wolfram.com/language/ref/Environment.html>`_
primitive taken from the code

.. code-block:: python

   class Environment(Builtin):

   def apply(self, var, evaluation):
       """Environment[var_?StringQ]"""
   ...

The evaluation method that starts with ``apply()`` above will get called when finding a
``Expression`` whose ``Head`` value is ``Environment`` and it has one
element or parameter which which we will call ``var``.  That element or
parameter should also much be a ``Symbol`` object.

For more information describing Mathics function signatures that are
used in the evaluation method's docstring , see `Functions and Programs
<https://reference.wolfram.com/language/tutorial/FunctionsAndPrograms.html>`_
and `Patterns
<https://reference.wolfram.com/language/tutorial/Patterns.html>`_.

One useful Mathics function that is useful in debugging pattern matching is  `Cases <https://reference.wolfram.com/language/ref/Cases.html>`_.

Built-in Function Name Descriptions
===================================

Online and printed documentation for builtin ``Environment`` comes from the docstring for ``class Environment`` if that exists.
In the example above, it was omitted. Here is what it looks like in the actual code.

.. code-block:: python

    class Environment(Builtin):
        """
        <dl>
          <dt>'Environment[$var$]'
          <dd>gives the value of an operating system environment variable.
        </dl>
        X> Environment["HOME"]
         = ...
        """

        def apply(self, var, evaluation):
        <dl>
          <dt>'Environment[$var$]'
          <dd>gives the value of an operating system environment variable.
        </dl>
        X> Environment["HOME"]
         = ...
	""""

The XML/HTML markup is used to format help nicely. "Documentation markup" elsewhere describes this markup.


Python Code for Evaluating an Expression
========================================

Building on the code shown above for parsing an expression,
here is code to evaluate an expression from a string:

.. code-block:: python

   # The below is a repeat of the parsing code...

   from mathics.core.parser import parse, SingleLineFeeder
   from mathics.core.definitions import Definitions

   definitions = Definitions(add_builtin=True)
   str_expression = "1 + 2 / 3"
   expr = parse(definitions, SingleLineFeeder(str_expression))

   # This code is new...

   from mathics.core.evaluation import Evaluation
   evaluation = Evaluation(definitions=definitions, catch_interrupt=False)
   last_result = expr.evaluate(evaluation)

   print("type", type(last_result))
   print("expr: ", last_result)

Running the above produces:

::

   type <class 'mathics.core.expression.Rational'>
   expr:  5/3

All of the above is wrapped nicely in the module ``mathics.session`` which
performs the above. So here is an equivalent program:

.. code-block:: python

    from mathics.session import session
    str_expression = "1 + 2 / 3"
    result = session.evaluate(str_expression)

    .. rubric: Footnotes

.. [1] Other names for "element": "subexpression" or in in Mathics/WL the ``Rest[]`` function.
.. [2] The use of the word ``apply`` is unfortunate. These methods are typically called evaluation or "eval" methods. Possibly sometime in the future, we will correct this mistake.
