docs/extending/code-overview/top-level-eval-print.rst, before:

Top-level Eval and Display
==========================

.. contents::


Definitions
-----------

Front-ends like (django, mathicsscript, mathics, MathicsSession)
create a ``Definitions`` object which initially has definitions of the
thousand or so standard Mathics Builtins.  Front ends can customize
these definitions. Usually more variables are added under the
``Settings`` name space.  For example, for mathicsscript there is
a variable containing the syntax-highlighting style to use; it can be altered.
Also there is a list of all possible syntax styles styles which is not alterable and not
in the ``Settings`` namespace. For Django, there is a Boolean setting indicating whether or
not to use a Sans-Serif font.

Evaluation
----------

In order to process input requests, an ``Evaluation`` object needs to
be created using some set of definitions. (Right now a new evaluation
object is created for each to-level expression, but this might not be
needed, and the prior object might be reused.)

This evaluation object has a scan-and-parse method which is passed some sort of
I/O handle to read from. The result of that is another S-expression
described in :ref:`AST <ast>`.

This S-expression result is then passed to the ``evaluate()``
method of the evaluation object. Evaluation may add, delete or change
definitions, so a front end will want definitions to persist in a
Mathics session while the Evaluation object may or may not.

Here is a some simple example showing steps from parsing to evaluation::

  $ python
  Python 3.8.10 ..
  >>> from mathics.session import MathicsSession
  >>> session = MathicsSession()
  >>> graph_circle = session.evaluate("Graph3D[Circle[]]")
  >>> graph_circle
  <Expression: Global`Graph3D[System`Circle[System`List[0, 0]]]>

In the above example, the input ``Graph3D[Circle[]]`` is not changed, but not that much:

* Namespaces are filled in from the abbreviated variables names. So we have
  ``Global`Graph3D`` instead of ``Graph3D`` and ``System`Circle`` instead of
  ``Circle``
* Rewrite rules have been applied. Here, it it is just to take the empty
  parameter list for ``Circle``, ``[]``, and expand that into a list,
  ``System`List[0, 0]``. Note that internally no nice abbreviations like ``{0, 0}``
  are used for the replaced output list. Expansion here has the effect of filling in
  the default value for a circle: a point whose center is at 0, 0.

We will come back to this example in the next section on formatting.

The pipeline sequence of operations: *tokenize input*, *parse tokens*,
and *evaluate* is common, and is done continuously inside a REPL. So there is a method
on the evaluation method called ``parse_evaluate()`` that does all 3
of these things.

The diagram below indicates this process

.. image:: top-level-eval-print.png
  :width: 800
  :alt: Top-level Eval Print Pipeline


The result from a top-level evaluation is a special ``Result`` kind of object containing:

*out*:
   a Python list containing all the messages and printed strings produced

*line_no*:
    the last line number for how far in the input progressed. This is most useful if there was an error.

*result*:
    a Python object containing the formatted version of the result of the evaluation

*last_eval*:
    the last result of the evaluation (an S-Expression), without formatting.


Formatting
----------

Here we describe the formatting process that produces ``result`` from
the S-Expression in ``last_eval``.

Expressions need to be wrapped in some sort of "Form", like
``TeXForm`` or ``MathMLForm``. This is done using the ``format()``
method of the expression object. This produces an S-Expression with "Box"ing
information.

Continuing using the example in the last section::

    >>> graph_circle
    <Expression: Global`Graph3D[System`Circle[System`List[0, 0]]]>
    >>>  graph_circle.format(session.evaluation, "TeXForm")
    <Expression: System`RowBox[System`List["\text{Graph3D}\left[\text{Circle}\left[\left\{0,0\right\}\right]\right]"]]>
    >>> graph_circle.format(session.evaluation, "MathMLForm")
    <Expression: System`RowBox[System`List["<math display="block"><mrow><mi>Graph3D</mi> <mo>[</mo> <mrow><mi>Circle</mi> <mo>[</mo> <mrow><mo>{</mo> <mrow><mn>0</mn> <mo>,</mo> <mn>0</mn></mrow> <mo>}</mo></mrow> <mo>]</mo></mrow> <mo>]</mo></mrow></math>"]]>
    >>>

This box expression is at the end converted into a string by means of
the method ``Expression.boxes_to_text``, and is what at the end will
be processed and shown in the front end.

Commit message:

Add note on why format gets an evaluation parameter

docs/extending/code-overview/top-level-eval-print.rst, after:

Top-level Eval and Display
==========================

.. contents::


Definitions
-----------

Front-ends like (django, mathicsscript, mathics, MathicsSession)
create a ``Definitions`` object which initially has definitions of the
thousand or so standard Mathics Builtins.  Front ends can customize
these definitions. Usually more variables are added under the
``Settings`` name space.  For example, for mathicsscript there is
a variable containing the syntax-highlighting style to use; it can be altered.
Also there is a list of all possible syntax styles styles which is not alterable and not
in the ``Settings`` namespace. For Django, there is a Boolean setting indicating whether or
not to use a Sans-Serif font.

Evaluation
----------

In order to process input requests, an ``Evaluation`` object needs to
be created using some set of definitions. (Right now a new evaluation
object is created for each to-level expression, but this might not be
needed, and the prior object might be reused.)

This evaluation object has a scan-and-parse method which is passed some sort of
I/O handle to read from. The result of that is another S-expression
described in :ref:`AST <ast>`.

This S-expression result is then passed to the ``evaluate()``
method of the evaluation object. Evaluation may add, delete or change
definitions, so a front end will want definitions to persist in a
Mathics session while the Evaluation object may or may not.

Here is a some simple example showing steps from parsing to evaluation::

  $ python
  Python 3.8.10 ..
  >>> from mathics.session import MathicsSession
  >>> session = MathicsSession()
  >>> graph_circle = session.evaluate("Graph3D[Circle[]]")
  >>> graph_circle
  <Expression: Global`Graph3D[System`Circle[System`List[0, 0]]]>

In the above example, the input ``Graph3D[Circle[]]`` is not changed, but not that much:

* Namespaces are filled in from the abbreviated variables names. So we have
  ``Global`Graph3D`` instead of ``Graph3D`` and ``System`Circle`` instead of
  ``Circle``
* Rewrite rules have been applied. Here, it it is just to take the empty
  parameter list for ``Circle``, ``[]``, and expand that into a list,
  ``System`List[0, 0]``. Note that internally no nice abbreviations like ``{0, 0}``
  are used for the replaced output list. Expansion here has the effect of filling in
  the default value for a circle: a point whose center is at 0, 0.

We will come back to this example in the next section on formatting.

The pipeline sequence of operations: *tokenize input*, *parse tokens*,
and *evaluate* is common, and is done continuously inside a REPL. So there is a method
on the evaluation method called ``parse_evaluate()`` that does all 3
of these things.

The diagram below indicates this process

.. image:: top-level-eval-print.png
  :width: 800
  :alt: Top-level Eval Print Pipeline


The result from a top-level evaluation is a special ``Result`` kind of object containing:

*out*:
   a Python list containing all the messages and printed strings produced

*line_no*:
    the last line number for how far in the input progressed. This is most useful if there was an error.

*result*:
    a Python object containing the formatted version of the result of the evaluation

*last_eval*:
    the last result of the evaluation (an S-Expression), without formatting.


Formatting
----------

Here we describe the formatting process that produces ``result`` from
the S-Expression in ``last_eval``.

Expressions need to be wrapped in some sort of "Form", like
``TeXForm`` or ``MathMLForm``. This is done using the ``format()``
method of the expression object. This produces an S-Expression with "Box"ing
information.

Continuing using the example in the last section::

    >>> graph_circle
    <Expression: Global`Graph3D[System`Circle[System`List[0, 0]]]>
    >>>  graph_circle.format(session.evaluation, "TeXForm")
    <Expression: System`RowBox[System`List["\text{Graph3D}\left[\text{Circle}\left[\left\{0,0\right\}\right]\right]"]]>
    >>> graph_circle.format(session.evaluation, "MathMLForm")
    <Expression: System`RowBox[System`List["<math display="block"><mrow><mi>Graph3D</mi> <mo>[</mo> <mrow><mi>Circle</mi> <mo>[</mo> <mrow><mo>{</mo> <mrow><mn>0</mn> <mo>,</mo> <mn>0</mn></mrow> <mo>}</mo></mrow> <mo>]</mo></mrow> <mo>]</mo></mrow></math>"]]>
    >>>

Notice in the above that ``format()`` was passed ``session.evaluation``. This gives the formatting the ability not just to query the environment outside of what was passed inside the ``graph_circle`` expression, but it also allows the fomatting to call back Mathics to perform additional calculations. For example, it is concievable that a particular formatter might want to know on what plain a particular polygon lies on, and Mathics might be able to get the answer to that.

This box expression is at the end converted into a string by means of
the method ``Expression.boxes_to_text``, and is what at the end will
be processed and shown in the front end.
