docs/extending/developing-code/extending/documentation-markup.rst, before:

.. _doc_markup:

Documentation Markup
====================

There is a lot of special markup syntax you can use in the
documentation. It is kind of a mixture of XML, LaTeX, Python doctest,
and custom markup.

*In the future, we plan to use more Sphinx-based documentation.*

The following commands can be used to markup documentation text:

For Help Text
-------------

.. _doc_help_markup:

.. index:: <dl>, <dt>, <dd>, <ul>, <ol>, <li>, <console>, <con>, <img>, <imgng>, <i>

+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Syntax                           | Explanation                             |
+==================================+=========================================+
|  <dl> *dl-list* </dl>            | a definition list with ``<dt>`` and     |
|                                  | ``<dd>`` entries.                       |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|  <dt> *title*                    | the title of a description item.        |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <dd> *description*               | the description of a description item.  |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <ul> *list* </ul>                | an unordered list of <li>               |
|                                  | entries.                                |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <ol> *list* </ol>                | an ordered list of <li> entries.        |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <li> *item*  `                   | an item of an unordered or ordered      |
|                                  | list. Note: no </li>.                   |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ``'`` *code* ``'``               | inline Mathics code or other code.      |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ``$`` *name* ``$``               | Math-mode variable identifier in        |
|                                  | Mathics code or in text.                |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <console> *text* </console>      | a console (shell/bash/Terminal)         |
|                                  | transcript in its own paragraph.        |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <con> *text* </con>              | an inline console transcript.           |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <em> *text* </em>                | emphasized (italic) text.               |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <i> *text* </i>                  | the same as <em>.                       |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <url> *url* </url>               | a URL.                                  |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <img ``src="`` *src* ``"``       | an image.                               |
| ``title="`` *title* ``"``        |                                         |
| ``label="`` *label* ``"``        |                                         |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <imgpng ``src="`` *src* "        | the same as <img>.                      |
| ``title="`` *title* ``"``        |                                         |
| ``label="`` *label* ``"``        |                                         |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <ref label=" *label* ">``        | a reference to an image.                |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ``\skip``                        | a vertical skip.                        |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ``\LaTeX``, ``\Mathematica``,    | special product and company names.      |
| ``\Mathics``                     |                                         |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ``\'``                           | a single ``'``.                         |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ``## $comment$``                 | a comment line that is not shown in the |
|                                  | documentation.                          |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+

To include images in the documentation, use the ``img`` tag, place an
EPS file *src* ``.eps`` in `mathics.doc.documentation.images <https://github.com/mathics/Mathics/tree/master/mathics/doc/documentation/images>`_ and run ``images.sh``
in the `mathics.doc <https://github.com/mathics/Mathics/tree/master/mathics/doc>`_ directory.

For Testing
-----------

.. _doc_test_markup:

.. index:: >>, #>, X>, S>, ..., \|, =

The following commands can be used to specify test cases.

+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| Markup                 | Meaning                                                   |
+========================+===========================================================+
| ``>>`` *Mathics code*  | Some Mathics code to run and to appear in documentation.  |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``#>`` *Mathics code*  | Some Mathics code to run but not appearing documentation. |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``X>`` *Mathics code*  | Mathics code shown in the documentation but not run.      |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``S>``                 | a test query that is shown in the documentation and run   |
|                        | if the ``SANDBOX`` environment variable is not set.       |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``=`` *output*         | expected output produced by the Mathics code.             |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``...``                | matches any output; used when output can vary.            |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``.``                  | a newline which is expected to appear in test output.     |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``-Graphics-``         | graphics in the test result.                              |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``:`` *message*        | a message in the result of the test query.                |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``\|`` *print*         | a printed line in the result of the test query.           |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+

*Note:* Please don't use ``#>``, ``X>`` and ``S>``. These are relics of the
days when people thought it cool to write a homegrown autodoc system,
and mistakenly felt it was a replacement for unit testing.

We currently have a growing list of pytests, so tests that are not
intended to explain should be added as pytests, not the kind of
home-grown testing system described here.

*Todo: give examples of each of these.*

Commit message:

More modernizations
* Make more clear deprecated doc markup
* Add url with link text form
* Describe return values of an evaluation method

docs/extending/developing-code/extending/documentation-markup.rst, after:

.. _doc_markup:

Documentation Markup
====================

There home-grown special markup syntax you can use in the
documentation. It is kind of a mixture of XML, LaTeX, Python doctest,
and custom markup.

*In the future, we plan to use more Sphinx-based documentation.*

The following commands can be used to markup documentation text:

Markup in Documentation
------------------------

.. _doc_help_markup:

.. index:: <dl>, <dt>, <dd>, <ul>, <ol>, <li>, <console>, <con>, <img>, <imgng>, <i>

+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Syntax                           | Explanation                             |
+==================================+=========================================+
|  <dl> *dl-list* </dl>            | a definition list with ``<dt>`` and     |
|                                  | ``<dd>`` entries.                       |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|  <dt> *title*                    | the title of a description item.        |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <dd> *description*               | the description of a description item.  |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <ul> *list* </ul>                | an unordered list of <li>               |
|                                  | entries.                                |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <ol> *list* </ol>                | an ordered list of <li> entries.        |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <li> *item*                      | an item of an unordered or ordered      |
|                                  | list. Note: no </li>.                   |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ``'`` *code* ``'``               | inline Mathics code or other code.      |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ``$`` *name* ``$``               | Math-mode variable identifier in        |
|                                  | Mathics code or in text.                |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <console> *text* </console>      | a console (shell/bash/Terminal)         |
|                                  | transcript in its own paragraph.        |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <con> *text* </con>              | an inline console transcript.           |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <em> *text* </em>                | emphasized (italic) text.               |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <i> *text* </i>                  | the same as <em>.                       |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <url> *url* </url>               | a URL.                                  |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <url> :link text: *url* </url>   | a URL with link text                    |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <img ``src="`` *src* ``"``       | an image.                               |
| ``title="`` *title* ``"``        |                                         |
| ``label="`` *label* ``"``        |                                         |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <imgpng ``src="`` *src* "        | the same as <img>.                      |
| ``title="`` *title* ``"``        |                                         |
| ``label="`` *label* ``"``        |                                         |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| <ref label=" *label* ">``        | a reference to an image.                |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ``\skip``                        | a vertical skip.                        |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ``\LaTeX``, ``\Mathematica``,    | special product and company names.      |
| ``\Mathics``                     |                                         |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ``\'``                           | a single ``'``.                         |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ``## $comment$``                 | a comment line that is not shown in the |
|                                  | documentation.                          |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+

To include images in the documentation, use the ``img`` tag, place an
EPS file *src* ``.eps`` in `mathics.doc.documentation.images <https://github.com/mathics/Mathics/tree/master/mathics/doc/documentation/images>`_ and run ``images.sh``
in the `mathics.doc <https://github.com/mathics/Mathics/tree/master/mathics/doc>`_ directory.

Markup for Code Examples
------------------------

.. _doc_test_markup:

.. index:: >>, #>, X>, S>, ..., \|, =

The following commands can be used to specify test cases.

+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| Markup                 | Meaning                                                   |
+========================+===========================================================+
| ``>>`` *Mathics code*  | Some Mathics code to run and to appear in documentation.  |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``=`` *output*         | expected output produced by the Mathics code.             |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``...``                | matches any output; used when output can vary.            |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``.``                  | a newline which is expected to appear in test output.     |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``-Graphics-``         | graphics in the test result.                              |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``:`` *message*        | a message in the result of the test query.                |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``\|`` *print*         | a printed line in the result of the test query.           |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+

It is good to create examples that convey some aspect about the Mathics Function.

In the past, the documentation system was abused and ran edge cases
and prior bugs fixed. For that please write a pytest.


We have not purged ourself of this behavior, so will find following
markup in docstrings. These are deprecated.

However please don't create more examples. Instead please consider
moving something like this to a pytest unit test which is far more flexibile.

+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| Markup                 | Meaning                                                   |
+========================+===========================================================+
| ``#>`` *Mathics code*  | Some Mathics code to run but not appearing documentation. |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``X>`` *Mathics code*  | Mathics code shown in the documentation but not run.      |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``S>``                 | a test query that is shown in the documentation and run   |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+

*Todo: give examples of each of these.*
